WIP: Current work on Variant specs (#461)
apache/parquet-format: VariantShredding.md

> **This specification is still under active development, and has not been formally adopted.**

The Variant type is designed to store and process semi-structured data efficiently, even with heterogeneous values.
Query engines encode each Variant value in a self-describing format, and store it as a group containing required `value` and `metadata` binary fields in Parquet.

> Since data is often partially homogenous, it can be beneficial to extract certain fields into separate Parquet columns to further improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Variant values within a column are often partially homogenous, common fields can be extracted into typed Parquet columns in a process defined as **shredding**. An engine utilizing these columns can get all the benefits of structured data while only incurring a performance penalty when accessing the non-shredded elements.
```

Reviewer: Suggestion for summarizing the following sections on motivation.

We refer to this process as **shredding**.

> Each Parquet file remains fully self-describing, with no additional metadata required to read or fully reconstruct the Variant data from the file.

Reviewer: Could we remove a bit of the motivation here from the spec itself?

Author: I trimmed the intro quite a bit.

|---------|------------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| 34      | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `34`          |
| null    | `01 00` v1/empty | `00` (null)           | null          |
| "n/a"   | `01 00` v1/empty | `13 6E 2F 61` (`n/a`) | null          |
| 100     | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `100`         |

Both `value` and `typed_value` are optional fields used together to encode a single value.
Values in the two fields must be interpreted according to the following table:

| `value`  | `typed_value` | Meaning                                                  |
|----------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| null     | null          | The value is missing                                     |
| non-null | null          | The value is present and may be any type, including null |
| null     | non-null      | The value is present and is the shredded type            |
| non-null | non-null      | The value is present and a partially shredded object     |

An object is _partially shredded_ when the `value` is an object and the `typed_value` is a shredded object.

> If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the value is invalid. Readers must either fail or return the `typed_value`.

Author: @RussellSpitzer and @gene-db, this could use some attention.

Here, if both `value` and `typed_value` are non-null I initially thought it made more sense to prefer `value` because it doesn't need to be re-encoded.

However, this conflicts with object fields, where the value of `typed_value` is preferred so that data skipping is correct. If the object's `value` could contains a field that conflicts with a sub-field's `typed_value` there is no way of knowing from field stats. If we preferred the field value stored in the object's `value` then data skipping could be out of sync with the value returned in the case of a conflict.

Reviewer: the `value` is invalid

```suggestion
If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the `value` is invalid. Readers must either fail or return the `typed_value`.
```

Author: The problem is that readers won't actually implement restrictions like this and we can't fully prevent it. It is invalid for a writer to produce a value where `value` and `typed_value` conflict. But writer bugs happen and readers need to know what to do when they encounter that situation. Otherwise we would get different behaviors between readers that are processing the same data file.

It all comes down to end users -- if a writer bug produces data like this, readers _will_ implement the ability to read because the data still exists and can be recovered. When that happens, we want to know how it is interpreted.

Reviewer 2: My take is if readers have bugs and produce invalid values, I'm not sure you can really trust most of the data at all (even metadata).  It sounds like we are assuming 1 specific type of bug where readers accidentally forget to clear a field?

Author: The point is not the bug. It is that we want to make it valid to read a projection without checking the `value` for bugs.

Author: I don't think I understand. If `a` and `b` are shredded, then there should be no fields with that name in `value` and the spec is stating that you don't need to check for them. That means all of the information needed to continue is in the shredded Parquet columns. That's not specific to Spark.

Reviewer 3: What I was trying to say is, if I am casting that field to a struct with "a" and "b" but "c" exists in value, then some engines will require that cast to fail, because the object with keys "a", "b" and "c" do not match the struct schema. Apparently, with spark such a cast succeeds by producing the struct with the subset of the keys that match the struct schema.

The Variant type is designed to store and process semi-structured data efficiently, even with heterogeneous values.
Query engines encode each Variant value in a self-describing format, and store it as a group containing `value` and `metadata` binary fields in Parquet.
Since data is often partially homogenous, it can be beneficial to extract certain fields into separate Parquet columns to further improve performance.
This process is **shredding**.

Shredding enables the use of of Parquet's columnar representation for more compact data encoding, the use of column statistics for data skipping, and partial projections from Parquet's columnar layout.

> For example, the query `SELECT variant_get(event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl` only needs to load field `event_ts`, and shredding can enable columnar projection that ignores the rest of the `event` Variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the query `SELECT variant_get(event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl` only needs to load field `event_ts`, and if that column is shredded, it can be read by Parquet column projection without deserializing the rest of the `event` Variant.
```

Author: Fixed.

> Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the `event_type` shredded column metadata can be used for skipping and to lazily load the rest of the Variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the `event_type` shredded column metadata can be used for skipping while the rest of the Variant is lazily loaded for matching pages.
```

For example, a Variant field, `measurement` may be shredded as long values by adding `typed_value` with type `int64`:
```
required group measurement (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional int64 typed_value;
}
```

The series of measurements `34, null, "n/a", 100` would be stored as:

| Value   | `metadata`       | `value`               | `typed_value` |
|---------|------------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| 34      | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `34`          |
| null    | `01 00` v1/empty | `00` (null)           | null          |
| "n/a"   | `01 00` v1/empty | `13 6E 2F 61` (`n/a`) | null          |
| 100     | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `100`         |

Both `value` and `typed_value` are optional fields used together to encode a single value.
Values in the two fields must be interpreted according to the following table:

| `value`  | `typed_value` | Meaning                                                  |
|----------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------|

> | null     | null          | The value is missing                                     |

Reviewer 4: Just to be clear, this is only allowed for object fields, right? You mention in the array section that array elements must have one of them non-null, but I think that's also true for the top-level `value`/`typed_value`, right?

Author: I think this would be good to clarify. I think that we could state that the variant could be null this way.

Reviewer 4: This would be Variant null (i.e. present but null)? I guess this is the same as the both-null case for array elements, which still seems to me more like an error state, but I guess Variant null is the best option if a reader doesn't want to fail.

Reviewer 3: My understanding was both typed_value and value being null meant variant being null if this is for the top level variant and field not being present for a shredded field.

Reviewer 4: My preference would be to make it illegal for the top level variant field to be variant-null (same for array elements). It seems like it adds a relatively rare special case that readers would need to handle, and doesn't add much value, since the null can be encoded in `value` just like for shredded fields. I don't feel too strongly if the consensus that it adds value.

Author: @cashmand, the problem with "make it illegal" is that there is no functional way to do this. We can state that writers should not set both `value` and `typed_value` to null in certain cases, but we have to define what to do if there is data that is actually written that way in order to have consistent and reliable behavior.

That's why this is called out as a requirement:
> If a Variant is missing in a context where a value is required, readers must either fail or return a Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

> | null     | null          | The value is missing                                     |

Reviewer: This is something I was a little confused about before. How do I differentiate between
```json
{ "foo" : { "x" : "null" }}
``` 
```json
{ "foo" : { }}
```

I may be missing something here but i'm trying to understand an empty vs missing shredding representation

Reviewer: Ok so if we have no difference between

||  foo.typed_value.x.typed_value | foo.typed_value.x.value |
|--| --|--|
|foo : { x : "null" } | null                                                | null |
|foo : { y : "bar" } | null                                                | null |

Reviewer 4: No, in the first case, `foo.typed_value.x.value` would be non-null, containing the variant value null (0x00). (Again, assuming you mean JSON null in your example, and not the string "null").

In the second case, it would be null (in the sense of the parquet definition level for `foo.typed_value.x.value` not being its maximum value).

Reviewer: So I can't have a shredded value that is Nullable?

Reviewer: Can't i have foo.typed_value.x.value = {'00'}?

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I understand the question. That represents a Variant Null, but in terms of Parquet definition levels, it's non-null. So Variant Null (`{"x": null}` in JSON) is represented by the non-null Variant value 0x00 in `x.value`, and a missing value is represented by (definition-level based) null in `x.value` and `x.typed_value`.

Reviewer: I asked this lower down, but I should have typed it out here.

Let's say I have a query on Variant column foo
`SELECT * WHERE foo.x = 5`

Now within a file I have variants
1) foo.x : 5
2) foo.x : null (is this possible?)
3) foo.y : "bazz"

Can I shred this file such that I can follow the rules below for file skipping where "foo.typed_value.x.value" is null (real null) for all the above rows

The number 2 case is the one I am worried about, for 3 I obviously just have null for "value" and "typed_value". But For case 2 what do I have?

Reviewer 4: > 2. foo.x : null (is this possible?)
`x` is a field of the Variant value foo, so it can't be null in a SQL/Parquet sense, it can only be Variant Null. That being said, in the Spark implementation (and I think Snowflake is similar) Variant Null will be coerced to a SQL null in most contexts (e.g. cast to string).

So to answer your question, `foo.typed_value.x.value` would be non-null. You'd need to check min/max stats to see if all values in `value` are exactly `0x00` in order to do file skipping.

Before the current PR, it was possible to do this - a missing value was encoded based on the definition level of the field (`x` in this case) and a variant null based on `value` and `typed_value` both being null. @rdblue's view was that it would be better to save a definition level by making the field `x` required (https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/461#discussion_r1811353611), and relying on binary min/max stats to identify this all-variant-null case.

Reviewer 3: @cashmand @rdblue 

following  example from David is not inline with my understanding of this spec :
**_{ "foo" : { }}: both foo.typed_value.x.value and foo.typed_value.x.typed_value for field x are null, indicating that x is missing from the object. But foo.typed_value is non-null, so there is an empty object, not a missing foo.
{ "foo": { "y": 123 }}: Here, x is also missing, so its fields are null, just like the second case. Assuming there's no y in the shredding schema, foo.value would store the binary representation of { "y": 123 }. foo.typed_value should still be non-null to indicate that there is a non-null object, just like in the empty object case._**

For { "foo": { "y": 123 }},  if x is the only shredded field, I do not think it should be necessary to create an empty object for the shredded fields. I guess we can do that, but just to confirm my understanding, this should not be required. Following this logic, for { "foo" : { }}, what is non-null can either be value, typed_value or both as long as all indicate empty objects and hence present values.

Reviewer 4: For the empty object case, I'd argue:
1) both non-null seems valid, if a bit wasteful.
2) Only typed_value non-null should be valid, and is efficient.
3) I'd prefer for only value non-null to be invalid, and don't see any good reason for it to be valid. I gave an example to motivate this in https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/pull/461#discussion_r1830046851: if a query tries to read a field as a struct with a schema that is a subset of the shredding schema (select cast(variant_col:foo as struct<event_type, event_ts>)`, we don't need to fetch `foo`'s `value` column, only `typed_value`. But if typed_value might be null when there's a non-null object, we do need to, or else we'd incorrectly return NULL instead of {NULL, NULL} in that case.

Reviewer 3: What is the semantics of cast(variant_col:foo as struct<event_type, event_ts>) ? Is it strictly requiring the variant to match the struct schema or not? If it requires schema match(and I think it should require a schema match), then assuming no full shredding, in the common case you will  need to read the value field regardless of whether we always write a empty object to typed_value. For example, instead of an object, you might have an integer or string in the value field, and even if we write an empty object to typed_value, you need to read value and figure out if it is something you can really cast to the target struct. So the argument given here only seems to apply to an empty object  which seems to be a corner case.

Reviewer 4: Spark has two cast variants, cast and try_cast. Both consider it valid to cast an object to a struct and drop fields. Whether this is the right choice is a fair question, but let's assume for now that it won't change. I think you're right that for `cast`, we'd need the `value` column to check for errors due to other types. But for `try_cast`, I think we would only need to check the `typed_value` column if we could rely on it setting the definition level based on the value being an object or not.

I don't think it's a huge deal if we need this extra IO, but my preference would be to have clear and limited choices  wherever possible for shredding decisions, so that readers can make optimal choices without risking correctness issues.

Reviewer 3: Sounds good. I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that this issue might also happen for leaf fields. For example you can have a string field field1. A row might have an int and for that row value will be a variant int. If you do foo:field1::number, you need to read the value field and get the int value. Having "some" value for the typed_value would not be useful here. Similarly, for the same shredding scenario, you might have a row with empty object at that field and I think it again makes more sense to put that to the value field.

Reviewer 4: Yes, agreed. The rule (which is meant to be spelled out in this doc, but feel free to suggest clarifications) is:

1) If `typed_value` is a group and the Variant value being shredded is an object, then `typed_value` must be non-null. `value` may also be non-null (specifically, if there are fields that aren't in the shredding schema).
2) In all other cases, at most one of `typed_value` and `value` can be non-null.

Author: I think I agree with @cashmand. When shredding an object (`typed_value` is a group), `typed_value` must be non-null. If we can rely on that rule then projections that only require specific fields don't need to read the value.

Author: I've also added this:
> Readers can assume that a value is not an object if `typed_value` is null and that `typed_value` field values are correct; that is, readers do not need to read the `value` column if `typed_value` fields satisfy the required fields.

| non-null | null          | The value is present and may be any type, including null |
| null     | non-null      | The value is present and is the shredded type            |
| non-null | non-null      | The value is present and is a partially shredded object  |

> An object is _partially shredded_ when the `value` is an object and the `typed_value` is a shredded object.

Reviewer 5: > the `typed_value` is a shredded object

IIUC, `typed_value` can also be a shredded array or primitive value?

Author: `typed_value` always has one Parquet type. Different `typed_value` Parquet columns can have different types, though.

If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the value is invalid. Readers must either fail or return the `typed_value`.

If a Variant is missing in a context where a value is required, readers must either fail or return a Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

> For example, if a Variant is required (like `measurement` above) and both `value` and `typed_value` are null, the returned `value` must be `00` (Variant null).

Reviewer 4: As mentioned in my previous comment, I think it would be invalid for `measurement` to have both `value` and `typed_value` be null, and should be an error. I don't understand why we're recommend returning variant null as an option.

Author: This rule is to address the fact that arrays cannot contain a missing value. This is saying that if a value is required but both are null, the implementation must fill in a variant null.

Reviewer 3: This rule(both value being null should be interpreted as json-null) is valid only for top level variant and array elements? I wonder how a top level variant can be inserted as both value and typed_value  being null if the top level field is required. That seems inconsistent. For arrays, it looks like we could also require value being variant encoded null(json null) rather than allowing both fields to be null.

Author: @sfc-gh-saya, if the top-level field is required but both fields are null, then the reader must produce a variant null value, `00`. We must state what happens in cases like this because it is possible for writers to produce them.

Reviewer 6: @rdblue Shouldn't this always be an error? This looks like invalid shredded data.

Above in the chart, we say `(value=null, typed_value=null) | The value is missing; only valid for shredded object fields`. This means we can only have `(null, null)` for shredded object fields.

In other scenarios, shredding should never produce `(null, null)`. If there was ever a required variant that is a variant-null, then the shredding scheme should produce `(variant-null, null)`, and should never produce `(null, null)`.

Author: We _could_ introduce more error cases, but I don't see much value in requiring this to be an error, but only when `value` and `typed_value` don't represent an object field. More error cases lead to more rejected data and it is simple to just define how to handle this case. That makes readers easier to implement.

|-----------------------------|------------------------------|
| boolean                     | BOOLEAN                      |
| int8                        | INT(8, signed=true)          |
| int16                       | INT(16, signed=true)         |
| int32                       | INT32 / INT(32, signed=true) |
| int64                       | INT64 / INT(64, signed=true) |
| float                       | FLOAT                        |
| double                      | DOUBLE                       |
| decimal4                    | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |
| decimal8                    | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |
| decimal16                   | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |
| date                        | DATE                         |
| timestamp                   | TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS)      |
| timestamp without time zone | TIMESTAMP(false, MICROS)     |
| binary                      | BINARY                       |
| string                      | STRING                       |
| array                       | LIST; see Arrays below       |
| object                      | GROUP; see Objects below     |

#### Primitive Types

> Primitive values can be shredded using the equivalent Parquet primitive type from the table above for `typed_object`.

Author: Fixed.

Unless the value is shredded as an object (see [Objects](#objects)), `typed_value` or `value` (but not both) must be non-null.

#### Arrays

Arrays can be shredded using a 3-level Parquet list for `typed_value`.

> If the value is not an array, `typed_value` must be null.

Reviewer 5: I think we need this for the case where a record contains a non-array value and thus should not be shredded. If we remove this, we cannot shred if any record has an exception.

> If the value is not an array, `typed_value` must be null.

Author: Yes. If the shredded column is an array and the actual value is not, then `typed_value` must be null.

If the value is an array, `value` must be null.

The list `element` must be a required group that contains optional `value` and `typed_value` fields.
The element's `value` field stores the element as Variant-encoded `binary` when the `typed_value` cannot represent it.

For example, a `tags` Variant may be shredded as a list of strings using the following definition:
```
optional group tags (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;

>   optional binary value;

Author: I don't think that's true. If the value is not an array, then this would be non-null.

  optional group typed_value (LIST) {   # must be optional to allow a null list
    repeated group list {
      required group element {          # shredded element
        optional binary value;
        optional binary typed_value (STRING);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

All elements of an array must be non-null because `array` elements in a Variant cannot be missing.
That is, either `typed_value` or `value` (but not both) must be non-null.

> Null elements must be encoded in `value` as Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

Reviewer: just for consistency it was written as 

```
 `00` (Variant null).
 ```
 
 Earlier in the doc but this is fine too

The series of `tags` arrays `["comedy", "drama"], ["horror", null], ["comedy", "drama", "romance"], null` would be stored as:

| Array                            | `value`     | `typed_value `| `typed_value...value` | `typed_value...typed_value`    |
|----------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------|
| `["comedy", "drama"]`            | null        | non-null      | [null, null]          | [`comedy`, `drama`]            |
| `["horror", null]`               | null        | non-null      | [null, `00`]          | [`horror`, null]               |
| `["comedy", "drama", "romance"]` | null        | non-null      | [null, null, null]    | [`comedy`, `drama`, `romance`] |
| null                             | `00` (null) | null          |                       |                                |

#### Objects

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

> If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.

Author: If `typed_value` is a shredded object (i.e., a group that is not a LIST) and the value to encode is not an object, `typed_value` must be set to null.

If the value is a partially shredded object, the `value` must not contain the shredded fields.
If shredded fields are present in the variant object, it is invalid and readers must either fail or use the shredded values.

> Each shredded field in the `typed_value` group is represented as a required group that contains optional `value` and `typed_value` fields.

Reviewer 4: I think that here and in the array case, it would be good to clarify whether `typed_value` can be omitted from the schema entirely. E.g. if there's no consistent type for a field, I think we'd still want to shred the field, but put all values in `value`, and not require that a `typed_value` type be specified.

Reviewer 4: Conversely, is `value` always required? Would it be valid for a writer to only create a `typed_value` column if it knows that all values have a predictable type that can be shredded?

Author: I think that `typed_value` could be omitted. Wouldn't that be the case where the element is simply not shredded? I think we should call it out here, but I'll also adjust the language so that it is clear that shredding is not required, except for object fields, where you'd simply not have a shredded field (it makes no sense to shred a field and not include `typed_value`).

Reviewer 4: Agreed, I think it makes complete sense for `typed_value` to be omitted, but it would be good to be clear.

I'm less clear about whether it should be valid (here, or for other types) to omit `value`, and treat that as equivalent to all null. I can sort of imagine cases where you're converting a typed parquet schema to variant, and know the types well enough to know that `value` will never be needed, but it seems like a fairly marginal benefit to omit `value` from the schema vs. leaving it and populating it will all nulls. Assuming that we don't want to allow that, it might be good to clarify somewhere that the `value` column is always required.

Reviewer 3: I do not get the benefit of optionally omitting typed_value. I think Ryan said the same thing above but omitting typed_value should be equivalent to not shredding a field in which case field should not exist in the schema to begin with. Omitting typed_value just seems to increase the number of cases to deal with. Similar argument can be made for value but actually being able to omit value has a benefit. If a writer uses V1 Parquet pages where you cannot get number of null values before reading def lvls for a field, not having value field in the schema for a perfectly shredded field would allow readers skip trying to figure out values are all null after reading the def lvls.

Reviewer 4: If a field has an inconsistent type, it may still be useful to shred it into `value` in order to fetch without the extra IO required to get the rest of the Variant.

> not having value field in the schema for a perfectly shredded field would allow readers skip trying to figure out values are all null after reading the def lvls

Couldn't it figure this out from the row group stats, since `value` should be null for all rows if it could have been omitted?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I agree shredding into value in case of inconsistent types is useful and I also really like that the changes to the spec makes is really clear as to when/how that happens.

Regarding value field, yes we could figure that out from row group stats but that is not always present.

Author: Added this:
> The `typed_value` field may be omitted when not shredding elements as a specific type.
> When `typed_value` is omitted, `value` must be `required`.

I think there is value in allowing elements to be shredded. We could get dictionary encoding for them.

The `value` field stores the value as Variant-encoded `binary` when the `typed_value` cannot represent the field.

> This layout enables readers to skip data based on the field statistics for `value` and `typed_value`.

Reviewer 5: IIUC, field statistics for `value` does not add too much value except for all nulls?

Author: The lower/upper bounds can be used to detect when all values are variant null.

Reviewer 2: This brings up an interesting use case.  It seems for value data having the type information in the most significant bits would allow further conferences like this (e.g. is it always a strong)

Reviewer 2: I think this is something we should discuss more widely.  Variant is still experimental from Parquet's perspective, and the binary metadata supports versioning.

I think there are a couple of ways we can make this work and not break existing variants in the wild (maybe there are others):
1.  Disambiguate on the logical type annotation which hasn't been released yet.
2. Use the metadata version to track the version 

I think option 2 is probably the most viable.

Reviewer 2: Another option is to add a statistics field to track which types are present in the value, this is more expensive then then min/max for what I believe the common case of likely only having one alternate type.

Author: I replied on the dev list, but I don't think this is worth making a breaking change to the encoding. There's little value here, especially if the non-shredded values end up being dictionary-encoded.

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with this, just wanted to make sure this was discussed it seems no one else has raised concerns on the dev list.

For example, a Variant `event` field may shred `event_type` (`string`) and `event_ts` (`timestamp`) columns using the following definition:
```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;                # a variant, expected to be an object
  optional group typed_value {          # shredded fields for the variant object
    required group event_type {         # shredded field for event_type
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_ts {           # shredded field for event_ts
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
  }
}
```

The group for each named field must be required.

> A field's `value` and `typed_value` are set to null (missing) to indicate that the field does not exist in the variant.

Reviewer 7: That would have some inconsistency with the encoding for primitive values that both nulls are invalid. 
Why do we make the group required? Can we have group optional and then the group is not present, then that means the field is missing.

Author: This is consistent. The table above states that if both `value` and `typed_value` are null, then the value is missing.

Reviewer 2: > What we would end up needing to say here is that when the field's group is null OR when it is non-null but both value and typed_value are null, the value is missing.

Doesn't the field's group being null imply both leaf fields are null though (so it can be interpreted as always missing)? It also seems like this case needs to happen anyways for any nested shredded objects?

I have to think more about if I feel strongly about it but if you assume that data is read into a sparse memory model (nulls values do not take space, e.g. Arrow but where null subfields don't have a slot associated with them) before reconstructing a variant it is cheaper to know that both fields are null at the upper level, so you don't take more space at the leaves (e.g. you could save 2 bits per missing value to void marking both as null).

Author: > Doesn't the field's group being null imply both leaf fields are null though

@emkornfield, it would but the point is that we don't need extra ways to express this so the field group should be `required` and not `optional`. Making the group optional introduces more cases that need to be documented, but don't provide any additional capability.

Reviewer 2: I think leaving as is is fine, we can always iterate if there is a strong reason do so.  @aihuaxu do you have further concerns here?

|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| `{"event_type": "noop", "event_ts": 1729794114937}`                                | null                              | non-null      | null                           | `noop`                               | null                         | 1729794114937                      | Fully shredded object                         |
| `{"event_type": "login", "event_ts": 1729794146402, "email": "user@example.com"}`  | `{"email": "user@example.com"}`   | non-null      | null                           | `login`                              | null                         | 1729794146402                      | Partially shredded object                     |

> | `{"error_msg": "malformed: ..."}`                                                  | `{"error_msg", "malformed: ..."}` | null          |                                |                                      |                              |                                    | Object with no shredding                      |

Reviewer 4: I think `typed_value` should be non-null (but still with all-null children). If a query needs to fetch `struct<event_type, event_ts>`, it can be done without needing the `value` column, and will still produce the correct struct nullness.

Based on @RussellSpitzer's question above, it also might be good to add an example of an empty object (`{ }`), where again, I think `typed_value` would be non-null, but `value` would be null.

Reviewer 3: I think this is kind of continuation of the above example. Having typed_value null looks good to me.

Author: Updated.

| `"malformed: not an object"`                                                       | `malformed: not an object`        | null          |                                |                                      |                              |                                    | Not an object (stored as Variant string)      |
| `{"event_ts": 1729794240241, "click": "_button"}`                                  | `{"click": "_button"}`            | non-null      | null                           | null                                 | null                         | 1729794240241                      | Field `event_type` is missing                 |

> | `{"event_type": null, "event_ts": 1729794954163}`                                  | null                              | non-null      | `00` (field exists, is null)   | null                                 | null                         | 1729794954163                      | Field `event_type` is present and is null     |

Reviewer: Some more requested examples, 

Could we have where "event_ts" is a Date or something non transformable into a timestamp?
I assume this would make value be `{"event_ts": "08-03-2025"}` while typed_value would be `null`

I also wonder if we could do a single example for a doubly nested field showing where typed_value.address.value != null. All the examples here cover a primitive field being typed, so It may be nice to show the behavior with a object being typed. 
```
{
 Name
 Address {
    City 
    ZIP (Shredded as INT but some values as String?)
    }
}
```

Author: I added most other examples, but I don't think that we need the nested example because it would make the table much larger. I also cover nesting in the next section specifically.

| null                                                                               | `00` (null)                       | null          |                                |                                      |                              |                                    | Object/value is null                          |
| missing                                                                            | null                              | null          |                                |                                      |                              |                                    | Object/value is missing                       |
| INVALID                                                                            | `{"event_type": "login"}`         | non-null      | null                           | `login`                              | null                         | 1729795057774                      | INVALID: Shredded field is present in `value` |

## Nesting

> The `typed_value` associated with any Variant `value` field can be any shredded type according to the rules above.

Reviewer: I don't think I understand this sentence, but I believe I understand the intent is that you can have objects or elements within arrays also shredded?

I think the tables above are easier for me to follow than the parquet schema below. I understand though if that's difficult to depict.

Author: This is just saying that any time you have a `value` field, you can also have a `typed_value` field that might be any shredded type, like an array nested in a field or an object nested in an array.

For example, the `event` object above may also shred sub-fields as object (`location`) or array (`tags`).

```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional group typed_value {
    required group event_type {
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_ts {
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
    required group location {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value {
        required group latitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
        required group longitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
      }
    }
    required group tags {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value (LIST) {
        repeated group list {
          required group element {
            optional binary value;
            optional binary typed_value (STRING);
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

# Data Skipping

> Statistics for `typed_value` columns can be used for file, row group, or page skipping when `value` is always null (missing).

Reviewer: Do we need to specify "null" vs "variant null" I get a little confused sometimes in the doc.

Author: Isn't "null (missing)" clear that it is not variant null? Missing is only used to mean one form of null in the text.

> When the corresponding `value` column is all nulls, all values must be the shredded `typed_value` field's type.

Reviewer: Sometimes we refer to the `value` as a column and sometimes as a field. Just wondering if we should take a pass to standardize unless there is another meaning i'm not following here.

Author: I think I was referring to "value" as a Parquet column. All object variant fields should be referred to as "field".

Reviewer 2: it might be good to have this in a glossary at the top.

Because the type is known, comparisons with values of that type are valid.
`IS NULL`/`IS NOT NULL` and `IS NAN`/`IS NOT NAN` filter results are also valid.

Comparisons with values of other types are not necessarily valid and data should not be skipped.

Casting behavior for Variant is delegated to processing engines.
For example, the interpretation of a string as a timestamp may depend on the engine's SQL session time zone.

> ## Reconstructing a Variant

Reviewer: Reconstructing a Shredded Variant?

> It is possible to recover a full Variant value using a recursive algorithm, where the initial call is to `construct_variant` with the top-level Variant group fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to recover a un-shredded Variant value using a recursive algorithm, where the initial call is to `construct_variant` with the top-level Variant group fields.
```

Author: Updated.

```python

> def construct_variant(metadata, value, typed_value):

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
def construct_variant(metadata: VariantMetadata, value: Any, typed_value: Any) -> VariantType:
```

Author: Updated.

    """Constructs a Variant from value and typed_value"""
    if typed_value is not None:
        if isinstance(typed_value, dict):
            # this is a shredded object
            object_fields = {
                name: construct_variant(metadata, field.value, field.typed_value)
                for (name, field) in typed_value
            }

            if value is not None:
                # this is a partially shredded object
                assert isinstance(value, VariantObject), "partially shredded value must be an object"

>                 assert typed_value.keys().isdisjoint(value.keys()), "object keys must be disjoint"

Reviewer: I know the rules above say it may return an error here or pull the value out of "typed_value". But if we are going to not allow it in this reference code I probably would say we should just never allow it

                # union the shredded fields and non-shredded fields
                return VariantObject(metadata, object_fields).union(VariantObject(metadata, value))

            else:
                return VariantObject(metadata, object_fields)

        elif isinstance(typed_value, list):
            # this is a shredded array
            assert value is None, "shredded array must not conflict with variant value"

            elements = [
                construct_variant(metadata, elem.value, elem.typed_value)
                for elem in list(typed_value)
            ]
            return VariantArray(metadata, elements)

        else:
            # this is a shredded primitive
            assert value is None, "shredded primitive must not conflict with variant value"

            return primitive_to_variant(typed_value)

    elif value is not None:
        return Variant(metadata, value)

    else:
        # value is missing
        return None

> def primitive_to_variant(typed_value):

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
def primitive_to_variant(typed_value: Any) -> VariantType:
```

Author: Updated

    if isinstance(typed_value, int):
        return VariantInteger(typed_value)
    elif isinstance(typed_value, str):
        return VariantString(typed_value)
    ...
```

## Backward and forward compatibility

> Shredding is an optional feature of Variant, and readers must continue to be able to read a group containing only `value` and `metadata` fields.

Reviewer 4: At this point, isn't non-shredded just a special case of shredded with no `typed_value` in the top level struct? I think it's automatically backwards compatible.

Author: I think the only thing that isn't backwards-compatible is that `value` is `optional` rather than `required` if you're shredding. But yes, writers are not required to shred.

Reviewer: Do we need to add a note that once shredded, a file must be read using this spec and the typed_value portion can not be ignored?

The Variant type is designed to store and process semi-structured data efficiently, even with heterogeneous values.
Query engines encode each Variant value in a self-describing format, and store it as a group containing `value` and `metadata` binary fields in Parquet.
Since data is often partially homogenous, it can be beneficial to extract certain fields into separate Parquet columns to further improve performance.
This process is **shredding**.

> Shredding enables the use of Parquet's columnar representation for more compact data encoding, column statistics for data skipping, and partial projections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shredding enables the use of Parquet's columnar representation for more compact data encoding, enabling column statistics for data skipping, and partial projections (i.e. extracting a specific path in a JSON object).
```

Author: I think JSON makes it more confusing because these objects are not JSON and contain typed values.

Reviewer 2: sorry this should have been "VARIANT" (not JSON) path.  Would that make more sense.

Author: I think it's pretty clear how this would work so I'm not sure the value here.

Reviewer 2: My intent was for those not fluent with Variant types to define what a "partial projection" means.  I proposed an alternative formulation of the sentence below as an alternative.

For example, the query `SELECT variant_get(event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl` only needs to load field `event_ts`, and if that column is shredded, it can be read by columnar projection without reading or deserializing the rest of the `event` Variant.
Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the `event_type` shredded column metadata can be used for skipping and to lazily load the rest of the Variant.

## Variant Metadata

Variant metadata is stored in the top-level Variant group in a binary `metadata` column regardless of whether the Variant value is shredded.

All `value` columns within the Variant must use the same `metadata`.
All field names of a Variant, whether shredded or not, must be present in the metadata.

## Value Shredding

Variant values are stored in Parquet fields named `value`.

> Each `value` field may have an associated shredded field named `typed_value` that stores the value when it matches a specific type.

Reviewer 2: I think we should be explicit that in this version of the spec, there can be exactly one "typed_value" column?

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it pays to name fields using something like hungarian notation to allow for easy evolution if we want to support multiple types in the future (I don't feel strongly about this).

Author: Isn't this clear? It says "an associated shredded field" with a specific name. I'm not sure how that could be interpreted to allow multiple fields in this version of the spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each `value` field may have a single associated shredded field named `typed_value` that stores the value when it matches a specific type.
```
I think you are right and I might have been reading to quickly, at least for me this probably would not have been something I missed (we can close this either way).

  optional binary value;
  optional int64 typed_value;
}
```

The series of measurements `34, null, "n/a", 100` would be stored as:

| Value   | `metadata`       | `value`               | `typed_value` |
|---------|------------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| 34      | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `34`          |
| null    | `01 00` v1/empty | `00` (null)           | null          |
| "n/a"   | `01 00` v1/empty | `13 6E 2F 61` (`n/a`) | null          |
| 100     | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `100`         |

Both `value` and `typed_value` are optional fields used together to encode a single value.
Values in the two fields must be interpreted according to the following table:

| `value`  | `typed_value` | Meaning                                                     |
|----------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| null     | null          | The value is missing; only valid for shredded object fields |
| non-null | null          | The value is present and may be any type, including null    |
| null     | non-null      | The value is present and is the shredded type               |

> | non-null | non-null      | The value is present and is a partially shredded object     |

Author: This is covered clearly in the object section:
> If the value is a partially shredded object, the `value` must not contain the shredded fields.

An object is _partially shredded_ when the `value` is an object and the `typed_value` is a shredded object.

If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the value is invalid. Readers must either fail or return the `typed_value`.

If a Variant is missing in a context where a value is required, readers must either fail or return a Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).
For example, if a Variant is required (like `measurement` above) and both `value` and `typed_value` are null, the returned `value` must be `00` (Variant null).

### Shredded Value Types

Shredded values must use the following Parquet types:

| Variant Type                | Equivalent Parquet Type      |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------|

> | boolean                     | BOOLEAN                      |

Reviewer 2: I think this goes back to earlier debates about allowed lossiness at the storage layer but it seems we might lose a lot of benefits to shredding if a single variant has multiple exact integer representations (e.g. mix of int32 and int64)

Reviewer 6: I think the state of this is that the storage will not do any conversions at all. However, the engine itself is allowed to "normalize" variants to optimize. In this case, engines will probably normalize within "exact numerics" in order to make shredding more effective.

Reviewer 2: As I digest the types, I feel like the concept of exact numeric is purely an engine concern and is an entirely new concept for parquet that isnt really explicitly modelled anyplace in the spec.  Given this I think my preferences would be:

1.  Remove the concept of this type of equality  from the parquet spec and leave it in the engine.
2. Make conversion to JSON an appendix as a recommendation 
3. Make sure we design the variant in parquet to optimized with shredding independent from  the engine (I think this means adding a type identifier discriminant field for the shredded column) also as I stated in another comment, it would be good to ensure the bit order for values makes it so that we can make the widest use of stats (e.g. type info is in the most significant bits) for the non-shredded value (iiuc this might require a second version for the non-shredded value, depending on what the current bit order means) 

Thoughts?

Author: The intent is to leave normalization and conversion to engines, but I don't think that we need to remove the Variant logical types in order to do that.

I also think that we need to have a reliable JSON representation or else we will get different behavior and conventions across engines. We want people to be able to rely on what the JSON means, even if it is necessarily lossy in some cases.

Reviewer 2: > The intent is to leave normalization and conversion to engines, but I don't think that we need to remove the Variant logical types in order to do that.

I think this might just be a philosophical difference of opinion.  But I believe Parquet implementations should have the flexibility to appropriately optimize across physical type.

 I think we should either:
1.  Not have the notion of logical type correspondence as part of variant in parquet.  Under this assumption we should provide enough modeling that parquet can do a reasonable job shredding and reproducing the exact physical types after shredding.  Parquet is used in a lot of contexts and I think in many cases the engines might not be very sophisticate here.
2.  Not require parquet to reproduce the exact physical types when reading back values (i.e. allow it to normalization).

Both approaches have there strengths, but what I would like to avoid is a tight coupling between the engine and parquet libraries to achieve efficient storage of variants.

Reviewer 6: The original motivation for introducing the "logical type" for the Variant binary encoding was to separate the "logical" data value, from the "physical" storage of the value, so that optimizations may be performed without altering the "logical" value. The value is important, not the storage type. For example, it shouldn't matter if the string `"hello"` is stored as a short-string or a string, and it shouldn't matter if the integer `1` is stored as an `int8` or `int16`. Within the same "logical type" the equivalent value can be stored in different ways.

We haven't fully defined the equality semantics yet, but the goal for the logical types is that if we had 2 Variant values:
- `"hello"` (as a short-string)
- `"hello"` (as a string)
those Variant values are considered equivalent, even though they are physically encoded differently.

Reviewer 2: @gene-db This makes sense.  I think we need to decide at the parquet level to either:
1.  Use this definition of logical type and make it valid for parquet to do normalization (e.g. physical types put in are not necessarily physical types you get out).
2. Make it possible for parquet to do lossless normalization (e.g. store values in the widest type that makes sense, and then also store metadata to retrieve types).

Reviewer 9: > Use this definition of logical type and make it valid for parquet to do normalization (e.g. physical types put in are not necessarily physical types you get out).

My opinion is that parquet the format should not "do" normalization (though it would be fine if the writer implementations did)

> I think the state of this is that the storage will not do any conversions at all. However, the engine itself is allowed to "normalize" variants to optimize. 

I believe this writeup from @gene-db describes what I would expect from a formrat. In summary:
1. The spec itself doesn't require / permit any normalization of values
2. The implementations of writers (e.g. parquet-rs or java-rs) could have options to automatically coerce types 

My rationale is that one normalization scheme is unlikely to work for all usecases, so mandating something in the spec will unnecessarily constrain users

@etseidl, @dsgibbons and others have been heading this way in parquet-rs recently (for example https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs/pull/6828) when normalizing data / schema might be preferred for wider compatibility, but users can still choose to use the raw data and maintain lossless roundtrip)

| int8                        | INT(8, signed=true)          |
| int16                       | INT(16, signed=true)         |
| int32                       | INT32 / INT(32, signed=true) |
| int64                       | INT64 / INT(64, signed=true) |
| float                       | FLOAT                        |
| double                      | DOUBLE                       |

> | decimal4                    | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |

Reviewer 2: right now writing int32 values for decimals is optional, do we want to be more proscriptive here (I think its fine to not be, just wanted to call it out).

Author: Yes. I'll update the `decimal4` and `decimal8` options. I'll leave the `decimal16` as-is because implementations are still free to use a binary or fixed type (or int32 and int64 if there is some guarantee values would fit).

| decimal8                    | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |
| decimal16                   | DECIMAL(precision, scale)    |
| date                        | DATE                         |
| timestamp                   | TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS)      |
| timestamp without time zone | TIMESTAMP(false, MICROS)     |
| binary                      | BINARY                       |
| string                      | STRING                       |
| array                       | LIST; see Arrays below       |
| object                      | GROUP; see Objects below     |

#### Primitive Types

Primitive values can be shredded using the equivalent Parquet primitive type from the table above for `typed_value`.

Unless the value is shredded as an object (see [Objects](#objects)), `typed_value` or `value` (but not both) must be non-null.

#### Arrays

> Arrays can be shredded using a 3-level Parquet list for `typed_value`.

Reviewer 2: must be?

Author: I changed this to "Arrays can be shredded *by* using a 3-level Parquet list . . .` so it is clear that arrays are optionally shredded but when they are they use a 3-level Parquet list.

If the value is not an array, `typed_value` must be null.
If the value is an array, `value` must be null.

> The list `element` must be a required group that contains `value` and `typed_value` fields.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it might be easier to rephrase this logic overall in terms of rules to value and typed value presence for VARIANT annotated types?  Something off the top of my head but would another logical type VARIANT_ELEMENT help make things clearer?

Reviewer 2: On further thinking a separate annotation probably does not add value here

The element's `value` field stores the element as Variant-encoded `binary` when the `typed_value` is not present or cannot represent it.

> The `typed_value` field may be omitted when not shredding elements as a specific type.

Reviewer 2: this seems in contradiction to line 120?

When `typed_value` is omitted, `value` must be `required`.

For example, a `tags` Variant may be shredded as a list of strings using the following definition:
```
optional group tags (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional group typed_value (LIST) {   # must be optional to allow a null list
    repeated group list {
      required group element {          # shredded element
        optional binary value;
        optional binary typed_value (STRING);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> All elements of an array must be present (not missing) because the `array` Variant encoding does not allow missing elements.

Reviewer 2: I might have read to quickly why is this true?  it seems like ["foo", null, "bar"] should be encodable

Reviewer 2: I think the answer here is me reading imprecisely.  I think we have a lot of technical terms and precision matters, a glossary to distinguish them I think would help readers better understand the spec:

So far I think:
1.  Field
2. Column
3. Null value (explicit null in the variant)
4. Missing (implicit null in variant object).
5. null/undefined values according to parquet definition levels (for shredding these are always used to indicate missing values or a a desciminator for which how to interpreted typed_value and values fields).

Reviewer 2: "optional", "required" vs present in the schema is another area that I think might have caused confusion.

That is, either `typed_value` or `value` (but not both) must be non-null.
Null elements must be encoded in `value` as Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

The series of `tags` arrays `["comedy", "drama"], ["horror", null], ["comedy", "drama", "romance"], null` would be stored as:

| Array                            | `value`     | `typed_value `| `typed_value...value` | `typed_value...typed_value`    |
|----------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------|

> | `["comedy", "drama"]`            | null        | non-null      | [null, null]          | [`comedy`, `drama`]            |

Reviewer 2: it might be worth describing def/repetition level here tobe more explicit?

Author: I don't think that would help make this table more clear. All of those are `optional`. The only case where `value` is `required` is when `typed_value` is omitted, which is not the case.

| `["horror", null]`               | null        | non-null      | [null, `00`]          | [`horror`, null]               |
| `["comedy", "drama", "romance"]` | null        | non-null      | [null, null, null]    | [`comedy`, `drama`, `romance`] |
| null                             | `00` (null) | null          |                       |                                |

#### Objects

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

> If the value is an object, `typed_value` must be non-null.

Reviewer 2: why is this required, lets say none of the fields end up getting shredded?  This is again for simplicity?

Author: This is a case that @cashmand pointed out above.

Say you have shredded fields `a: int`, `b: string`, and `c: double` and the projection requested projection is `object<a: int, b: string>`. The engine should be able to project the `value` and `typed_value` fields for from the groups for `a` and `b`, without projecting the object's `value`.

If the spec were to allow encoding all shredded fields as missing by setting the object's `typed_value` to null, then it wouldn't be possible to determine whether the requested projection is `null` because the value is not an object or if it is an empty object (`{ }`) because the value was an object that didn't have fields `a`, `b`, or `c`.

The solution is to use the definition level of `typed_value` to encode whether the value is an object so that it is known when you project any of the fields.

Reviewer 2: Added a suggestion below to capture this.

If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.

> Each shredded field in the `typed_value` group is represented as a required group that contains optional `value` and `typed_value` fields.

Reviewer 2: Are we making these required just to reduce complexity, it seems like there is potential value in allowing setting the value null at the parent level (maybe not with repetition/definition level, but if we ever revisit this encoding it could be useful).

Reviewer 2: seems like the answer below is yet. it might pay to clarify this is the reason.

The `value` field stores the value as Variant-encoded `binary` when the `typed_value` cannot represent the field.
This layout enables readers to skip data based on the field statistics for `value` and `typed_value`.

If the value is a partially shredded object, the `value` must not contain the shredded fields.

> If shredded fields are present in the variant object, it is invalid and readers must either fail or use the shredded values.

Reviewer 2: I think we should probably prefer failing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Readers are not required to check for overlap of between the fields in a `value` object and the `typed_value` schema.  If there is an overlap behavior of the reader is undefined.
```

This makes sense, I think we should just state the requirement that the check is not necessary and that it is undefined behavior if there is overlap.

Author: I like the part about not required to check, but the behavior cannot be undefined. If you don't have to check, then it should be a valid read and we need to know what value should be returned.

For example, a Variant `event` field may shred `event_type` (`string`) and `event_ts` (`timestamp`) columns using the following definition:
```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;                # a variant, expected to be an object
  optional group typed_value {          # shredded fields for the variant object
    required group event_type {         # shredded field for event_type
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_ts {           # shredded field for event_ts
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
  }
}
```

> The group for each named field must be required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The group for each named field must be a repetition level of "required".
```

A field's `value` and `typed_value` are set to null (missing) to indicate that the field does not exist in the variant.
To encode a field that is present with a null value, the `value` must contain a Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

> The series of objects below would be stored as:

Reviewer 2: could you provide a link, (or maybe inline the values here) so it is easy t compare with the table?

Author: The values are the first column of the table. I rephrased to make it more clear.

| INVALID                                                                            | `"a"`                             | non-null      | null                           | `login`                              | null                         | 1729795057774                      | INVALID: `typed_value` is present for non-object |
| INVALID                                                                            | `02 00` (object with 0 fields)    | null          |                                |                                      |                              |                                    | INVALID: `typed_value` is null for object        |

Invalid cases in the table above must not be produced by writers.
Readers must return an object when `typed_value` is non-null containing the shredded fields.
If `typed_value` is null and `value` is an object, readers may read the encoded object but are not required to do so.

> Readers can assume that a value is not an object if `typed_value` is null and that `typed_value` field values are correct; that is, readers do not need to read the `value` column if `typed_value` fields satisfy the required fields.

Reviewer 2: I don't think I understand this, is it possible to illustrate with an example?

Author: This is again establishing that the shredded values can always be trusted even if there is an encoding problem.

For example, take the case above where two fields of an object are being projected. This is saying that it is not necessary to read the object's `value` field to check for invalid cases:
* If the shredded fields are defined but `value` does not contain an object
* If the shredded fields are duplicated or conflicting with fields in a `value` object

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification.  I think maybe this should be grouped with line 159 to make the context clearer?

Author: Moved.

For example, the `event` object above may also shred sub-fields as object (`location`) or array (`tags`).

```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional group typed_value {
    required group event_type {
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_ts {
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
    required group location {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value {
        required group latitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
        required group longitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
      }
    }
    required group tags {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value (LIST) {
        repeated group list {
          required group element {
            optional binary value;
            optional binary typed_value (STRING);
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

# Data Skipping

> Statistics for `typed_value` columns can be used for file, row group, or page skipping when `value` is always null (missing).

Reviewer 2: This seems limiting?  If have a predicate like `ExtractElement($.maybe_str_value) = TIMESTAMP_NOW(), couldn't an engine use statistics if the there is a shredded timestamp column (i.e. by definition anything stored in value would not meet this predicate)?

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is related to another question.  Are writers required to shred all values into typed_value that they can?

Author: This was careful not to limit the cases where you can infer the statistics can be used. That's why it says **can be used** and **when `value` is always null**. When `value` is null/missing, then you know that all of the values have been shredded and the stats for `typed_value` are correct.

Note that there are other cases where stats are still usable. For instance, if the `value` column's lower and upper bounds are both `00` (Variant-encoded null) then you can trust the stats for the non-null values.

> Are writers required to shred all values into typed_value that they can?

No, but it would limit the ability to take advantage of shredding. There's no value in requiring shredding for all values that can be, because there are still cases where values cannot be shredded (i.e. finding `"n/a"` in an integer column) and we need to be able to handle those non-shredded cases.

Reviewer 2: > There's no value in requiring shredding for all values that can be, because there are still cases where values cannot be shredded (i.e. finding "n/a" in an integer column) and we need to be able to handle those non-shredded cases.

I think this goes back to the bit-ordering problem.  I think the "n/a" case could be identified if you know that all non-shredded values are strings.

Some alternatives here that could still be helpful:

 is to require writers of typed_values to compute stats across all relevant types (even those that are not shredded):
- Exact numeric and floating point (for values that would overflow on conversion, the corresponding statistic isn't set.  For integer<->decimal<->floating point using the rounded extrema would make the statistics useful)
- DateTime with timezone (nanos/micros)
- etc.

This means predicates like `AS_REAL(EXTRACT(col1, '$.a')) > 0.5` could always use stats to prune if the shredded value was any numeric type.

Author: I don't think that we can't expect writers to produce custom stats for types based on logical type annotation. If you want stats, then the field should be shredded.

We also can't assume that the semantics of the predicates are to match a type and extract. Those semantics are up to the engine. That's one reason that we need to leave this open-ended.

Reviewer 2: Discussed on dev list and seems like taking a simpler approach for now did not raise objections.

                return VariantObject(metadata, object_fields)

        elif isinstance(typed_value, list):
            # this is a shredded array
            assert value is None, "shredded array must not conflict with variant value"

            elements = [
                construct_variant(metadata, elem.value, elem.typed_value)
                for elem in list(typed_value)
            ]
            return VariantArray(metadata, elements)

        else:
            # this is a shredded primitive
            assert value is None, "shredded primitive must not conflict with variant value"

            return primitive_to_variant(typed_value)

    elif value is not None:
        return Variant(metadata, value)

    else:
        # value is missing
        return None

def primitive_to_variant(typed_value: Any): Variant:
    if isinstance(typed_value, int):
        return VariantInteger(typed_value)
    elif isinstance(typed_value, str):
        return VariantString(typed_value)
    ...
```

## Backward and forward compatibility

Shredding is an optional feature of Variant, and readers must continue to be able to read a group containing only `value` and `metadata` fields.

> Engines without shredding support are not expected to be able to read Parquet files that use shredding.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't sound right to me.  I don't think they need to be able to write but it seems they should be able to read them (although I'm not sure we should dictate this at the engine level).

Author: Yeah, good catch. I'll update this.

Different files may contain conflicting schemas.

> That is, files may contain different `typed_value` columns for the same Variant with incompatible types.

Reviewer 2: This has interesting implications for tools that I think already exist in parquet-mr (I thought there was something that could concatenate parquet files).  Is the intent that tools like this would fail?

Reviewer 5: For concatenating files with different shredded variant types, a quick hack is to just make them non-shredded.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, this is one reason though that we probably want to ensure a reference implementation can understand the type

Author: Utilities for concatenating Parquet files still require the same physical schema. For instance, concatenating a list of required elements with a list of optional elements is not possible without rewriting because the repetition level of the list element must match the encoding. This would be no different.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense.

Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the `event_type` shredded column metadata can be used for skipping and to lazily load the rest of the Variant.

## Variant Metadata

Variant metadata is stored in the top-level Variant group in a binary `metadata` column regardless of whether the Variant value is shredded.

All `value` columns within the Variant must use the same `metadata`.
All field names of a Variant, whether shredded or not, must be present in the metadata.

## Value Shredding

Variant values are stored in Parquet fields named `value`.
Each `value` field may have an associated shredded field named `typed_value` that stores the value when it matches a specific type.
When `typed_value` is present, readers **must** reconstruct shredded values according to this specification.

For example, a Variant field, `measurement` may be shredded as long values by adding `typed_value` with type `int64`:
```
required group measurement (VARIANT) {

>   required binary metadata;

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if this is already mentioned anywhere, but there's no requirement of ordering for these fields in the parquet schema, right? I wouldn't expect there to be, but the MapType in https://github.com/apache/parquet-format/blob/master/LogicalTypes.md is a bit ambiguous (`key and value can be identified by their position in case of misnaming`), so it might be good to explicitly mention that the metadata doesn't need to come first in the schema.

Author: I think that's a good point. I'll note that the names must match and while the order should match, it should not be relied on.

Null elements must be encoded in `value` as Variant null: basic type 0 (primitive) and physical type 0 (null).

The series of `tags` arrays `["comedy", "drama"], ["horror", null], ["comedy", "drama", "romance"], null` would be stored as:

| Array                            | `value`     | `typed_value `| `typed_value...value` | `typed_value...typed_value`    |
|----------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------|
| `["comedy", "drama"]`            | null        | non-null      | [null, null]          | [`comedy`, `drama`]            |
| `["horror", null]`               | null        | non-null      | [null, `00`]          | [`horror`, null]               |
| `["comedy", "drama", "romance"]` | null        | non-null      | [null, null, null]    | [`comedy`, `drama`, `romance`] |
| null                             | `00` (null) | null          |                       |                                |

#### Objects

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

If the value is an object, `typed_value` must be non-null.

> If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null [1].

[1] These requirements allows readers to easily distinguish between empty objects (`{}`) and other variant types when attempting to project an object and all the projected object fields have been shredded.
```
Not sure if this is valid markdown but I think it is worth capturing context. But I think this captures the reasoning explained below (phrasing on footnote can probably be improved)?

Author: I moved the line that is now just below this to expand on it.

For example, the `event` object above may also shred sub-fields as object (`location`) or array (`tags`).

```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional group typed_value {
    required group event_type {
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_ts {
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
    required group location {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value {
        required group latitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
        required group longitude {
          optional binary value;
          optional double typed_value;
        }
      }
    }
    required group tags {
      optional binary value;
      optional group typed_value (LIST) {
        repeated group list {
          required group element {
            optional binary value;
            optional binary typed_value (STRING);
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

# Data Skipping

> Statistics for `typed_value` columns can be used for file, row group, or page skipping when `value` is always null (missing).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Min/Max statistics for `typed_value` columns may be used for row group and page skipping when `value` is always null (missing).  The statistics may also be used if statistics can be used to infer the type of all non-null values have an irrelevant type (e.g.  if all values are variant null (`00`) and a filter specifies equality to a integer).
```

Author: I don't think that we should make this more specific because anything further risks making assumptions about the semantics of the filter. The example on the dev list demonstrates this. This can't state that strings can be ignored for numeric filters because the filter may cast a string and result in a valid value.

|---------|------------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| 34      | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `34`          |
| null    | `01 00` v1/empty | `00` (null)           | null          |
| "n/a"   | `01 00` v1/empty | `13 6E 2F 61` (`n/a`) | null          |
| 100     | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `100`         |

Both `value` and `typed_value` are optional fields used together to encode a single value.
Values in the two fields must be interpreted according to the following table:

| `value`  | `typed_value` | Meaning                                                     |
|----------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| null     | null          | The value is missing; only valid for shredded object fields |
| non-null | null          | The value is present and may be any type, including null    |
| null     | non-null      | The value is present and is the shredded type               |
| non-null | non-null      | The value is present and is a partially shredded object     |

An object is _partially shredded_ when the `value` is an object and the `typed_value` is a shredded object.

> When `typed_value` is non-null, its value must always be used when reading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `typed_value` is non-null, its value must always be used when reading.
```

> Writers must not produce data where both `value` and `typed_value` are non-null, unless the Variant value is an object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writers must not produce data where both `value` and `typed_value` are non-null, unless the Variant value is an object. [^1]
```

[^1] If files are produced that do not conform to this requirement, reader behavior is undefined, and will not be defined.  The recommended recourse for defined behavior is to rewrite the data correcting for any data inconsistencies. Readers may assume that data written conforms to the specification. Readers are free to optimize reading only `typed_value` and `value` to fulfill queries appropriately.  Readers do not need to check for this requirement due avoid performance overhead.  If readers do check for consistency and find inconsistent data readers should return an error.  Based on these assumptions correct behavior cannot be defined because the depending on the query readers might return logically inconsistent results, and therefore this is no behavior that is always correct.  Hence favoring data from either `typed_value` or `value` simply masks deeper systemic issues.  Therefore, changing implementations to favor one vs the other is discouraged.

| null                             | `00` (null) | null          |                       |                                |

#### Objects

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

If the value is an object, `typed_value` must be non-null.
If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.
Readers can assume that a value is not an object if `typed_value` is null and that `typed_value` field values are correct; that is, readers do not need to read the `value` column if `typed_value` fields satisfy the required fields.

Each shredded field in the `typed_value` group is represented as a required group that contains optional `value` and `typed_value` fields.
The `value` field stores the value as Variant-encoded `binary` when the `typed_value` cannot represent the field.
This layout enables readers to skip data based on the field statistics for `value` and `typed_value`.

The `value` column of a partially shredded object must never contain fields represented by the Parquet columns in `typed_value` (shredded fields).

> The values stored in shredded fields must always be used when reading.

Reviewer 7: What does this mean?  Do we mean:  `value` or `typed_value` inside event_type group should be used when reading event_type field?
> The values stored in shredded fields must always be used when reading.

The Variant type is designed to store and process semi-structured data efficiently, even with heterogeneous values.
Query engines encode each Variant value in a self-describing format, and store it as a group containing `value` and `metadata` binary fields in Parquet.
Since data is often partially homogenous, it can be beneficial to extract certain fields into separate Parquet columns to further improve performance.
This process is **shredding**.

Shredding enables the use of Parquet's columnar representation for more compact data encoding, column statistics for data skipping, and partial projections.

> For example, the query `SELECT variant_get(event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl` only needs to load field `event_ts`, and if that column is shredded, it can be read by columnar projection without reading or deserializing the rest of the `event` Variant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A partial projection occurs with a query like `SELECT variant_get(event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl`. In this case an engine only needs to load field `event_ts`, and if `event_ts` column is shredded, it can be read without reading or deserializing the rest of the `event` Variant.
```

Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the `event_type` shredded column metadata can be used for skipping and to lazily load the rest of the Variant.

## Variant Metadata

Variant metadata is stored in the top-level Variant group in a binary `metadata` column regardless of whether the Variant value is shredded.

All `value` columns within the Variant must use the same `metadata`.
All field names of a Variant, whether shredded or not, must be present in the metadata.

## Value Shredding

Variant values are stored in Parquet fields named `value`.
Each `value` field may have an associated shredded field named `typed_value` that stores the value when it matches a specific type.
When `typed_value` is present, readers **must** reconstruct shredded values according to this specification.

For example, a Variant field, `measurement` may be shredded as long values by adding `typed_value` with type `int64`:
```
required group measurement (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;

>   optional binary value;

Reviewer 10: Hi @rdblue , I have thought of a specific scenario: suppose the json is a struct and has 4000 kvs, of which 100 keys intend to construct `typed_value`. The remaining 3900 columns will not be shredded. In this case, they will all be stored in `value`.

Is it possible for us to define the max number of keys contained in one binary `value`, such as in this case, storing a maximum of 1000, so that v1, v2, v3, v4 can be generated to reduce scan IO.

Futher more, we can define the concept of `group` and stipulate that some certain keys are divided into one binary `value1`.

Reviewer 2: @Zouxxyy could you expand on this use-case?  Is there a specific query pattern for this type of division would improve performance for?

Reviewer 10: @emkornfield For the cols that we do not intend to shred, if we categorize them into four groups and happen to query fields within one of those groups, then our scan I/O can still be reduced by three-quarters. 
Of course, I feel that the concept of `group` will make shredding more complex (currently, it is concise and clear enough), I'm just looking to explore the possibilities and hear opinions.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @Zouxxyy IIUC I think the suggestion is "partial shredding".  Wouldn't this in most cases require consistent keys in the metadata portion (otherwise, one would need to do a full scan of the metadata column to determine all potential groups necessary, and it might turn out without consistent keys that multiple groups are needed for a single column)?  If the keys are already all consistent, what are the trade-offs of partial shredding vs full shredding (i.e. all 4000 values are shredded)?

This goes back to my question on whether this is simply more theoretical at this point, or there are concrete use-cases where this suggestion would actually save a lot.

Reviewer: @Zouxxyy These would just be decisions made by the Shredder, the spec itself doesn't need a limit. For example you may make a "Shred Everything" shredder or you may have a "Shred only the most frequent field" shredder.

|---------|------------------|-----------------------|---------------|
| 34      | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `34`          |
| null    | `01 00` v1/empty | `00` (null)           | null          |
| "n/a"   | `01 00` v1/empty | `13 6E 2F 61` (`n/a`) | null          |
| 100     | `01 00` v1/empty | null                  | `100`         |

Both `value` and `typed_value` are optional fields used together to encode a single value.
Values in the two fields must be interpreted according to the following table:

| `value`  | `typed_value` | Meaning                                                     |
|----------|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| null     | null          | The value is missing; only valid for shredded object fields |
| non-null | null          | The value is present and may be any type, including null    |
| null     | non-null      | The value is present and is the shredded type               |
| non-null | non-null      | The value is present and is a partially shredded object     |

An object is _partially shredded_ when the `value` is an object and the `typed_value` is a shredded object.

> If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the value is invalid. Readers must either fail or return the `typed_value`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both fields are non-null and either is not an object, the value is invalid.  Reader behavior is undefined[^2]

[^2] The correct thing to do in this situation is rewrite the data file in this scenario (the correct way of rewriting the file can only be determined based on the bug that produced the inconsistency).  Readers are encouraged to error this case to help identify writer bugs as soon as possible.  Erroring might not be appropriate or possible given reader optimizations.  If a reader does not error in this case, then favoring the shredded values would provide more consistent results (i.e. it works across both partial-projection and full reconstruction) but this does not make using the shredded values correct, simply more consistent.  Similarly, and "read side fix" is discouraged, but might be used by specific readers to help their consumers until data can be rewritten.
```

@rdblue @julienledem I think this language might capture all of the concerns across (I think this wording applies to all potential incosistencies).

Reviewer: @rdblue  and I also talked about this for a long time and I think I favor the current text. I feel like the additional text adds a bit of confusion around this. 

A shredded reading of a field is always correct since a shredded reader will not be able to check an unshreddeed value for inconsistency, a reader using an un-shredded value when the shredded value is present is always incorrect.

Reviewer 2: > @rdblue and I also talked about this for a long time and I think I favor the current text. I feel like the additional text adds a bit of confusion around this.

We also talked about it in the sync and didn't come to the conclusion.  IIUC @rdblue wanted the error handling language to eliminate the possibility of trying to define an alternative behavior down the road by one specific reader. I don't think we should be mandating this in the spec but I do agree we should be clarifying this won't be relitigated.

> A shredded reading of a field is always correct since a shredded reader will not be able to check an unshreddeed value for inconsistency, a reader using an un-shredded value when the shredded value is present is always incorrect.

I think semantics are important here. I tried to cover this by saying it is "consistent", i.e. it would always provided consistent results to the end user, which is a nice property to have and I agree most implementations should use it if they aren't going to error out.

"correct", I think, is a property of actually returning the the variant data without modification.  Without understanding the bugs that introduced inconsistent shredding, I don't think it is possible say for sure the shredded values are correct.  

The reason why I think it is important to say it is not "correct" is because in other instances (e.g. requiring no overlap between shredded/not shredded fields) to write out of spec files that would not face any issues (as an alternative I think it would OK to have overlapping values as long as they are consistent, then the real question becomes what happens if the values are not actually consistent, in this case I think it would really be very hard to understand what the correct results are).

As an analogy from another part of parquet (and a real world example I've encounted).  Assume a schema like `list<struct<required a int, required b int>>` we do not require readers to check that repetition levels and definition levels are consistent for columns a and b (and many don't).  If they are not equal it is a bug, we can't really say which one, or if either is, "correct" without understanding the bug that introduced the inconsistency.    A "consistent" result would be to always use the left most columns repetition and definition levels.

Reviewer 2: To maybe go a little bit deeper here, I think it is worth enumerating a matrix of potential operations and data inconsistencies (see below).  The main purpose of these examples is to show that:

1.  Requiring using `typed_value` or `failure` pessimizes some cases or requires that different operations will return inconsistent result (making the value of trying to force consistency in some cases have less utility).
2. Preferring `typed_value` in the presence of some inconsistencies sseems like an arbitrary choice simply for the sake of not exposing bugs in the underlying data.

I think the way of rectifying this is either to add more cases that are considered "valid" (e.g. shredded object fields might overlap with fields in value as long as they are consistent) and/or leave the behavior undefined.  My preference would simply be to do the latter.

I think there are three main operations that will be performed with Variant:
1.  Project as primitive non-strict - Return a field as a specific primitive value, if a field mismatches the type return null in its place.
4. Project as primitive strict - Return a field specific primitive value if a field mismatches the type the query is failed.
5. Project as variant - project a field as a variant type allowing for mixed types to be returned (this would also be projecting the top level variant to get the original value).

# Primitive inconsistencies

Assume for all these cases a column is shredded as int32 as its typed value.

## Inconsistency: Both typed_value and value are present for the same cell and the values are consistent with one another (e.g. all values in `value` column are int32 and exactly equal to those in `typed_value`

*Operation*: Project field as int32 non-strict.  In this case engines would prefer to always use typed_value and never need to read `value`

*Operation*: Project field as string not-strict. In this case only `value` column would need to be read but would return consistent results as using `typed_value`

*Operation*: Project field as int32 as strict.  If it is required that a field that can be projected always is (IIUC this isn't currently mandated by the spec), then this operation should fail on statististics as there would be a `non-null` `value` column.  Otherwise this effectively requires the same logic projecting a variant described below.

*Operation*: Project field as string strict.  This would fail based on stastistics from `typed_value`.

*Operation*: Project field as variant.  In this case both `typed_value` and `value` would need to be read and merged.  When merging the reader could chose to always take the non-null value from `typed_value` ignoring any present values in `value` (assuming corresponding values are null).  This would however lead to a strange state where after all values are merged, fewer cells from `value` would be read then are present.  An alternative would be check for consistency between repetition/definition levels, and realize they are both defined and still favor `typed_value`, or check for consistency and continue reading as long as `value` and `typed_value` are consistent.

## Inconsistency: Both type_value and value are present for the same cell and are inconsistent with one another (i.e. `value` contains a string).

*Operation*: Project field as int32 non-strict.  In this case engines would prefer to always use typed_value and never need to read `value`.  int32 value is returned over the string value

*Operation*: Project field as string not-strict. In this case only `value` column would need to be read but would return inconsistent string value in the cells that conflict.

*Operation*: Project field as int32 as strict. Same as data inconsistency above.

*Operation*: Project field as string as strict. Same as data inconsistency above (fail based on statistics).

*Operation*: Project as variant.  Same as data inconsistency above, but if the reader is checking for consistency between values to decide on what to do, as the current spec is written it would arbitrarily choose int32 value (valid alternatives seem like failure or returning the `string` value.

# Object inconsistencies

In this case assume there the object is shredded with a single child field "a" as int32.  Objects overlap with the cases outlined above for consistency/inconsistency so they are not covered here, only somewhat novel cases are discussed below (merging is taken one step further because field overlap either must be detected or duplicate fields could be added when reconstructing the full variant).

## Inconsistency: The `value` object contains a non-object value (e.g. string) in the same cell that has a present value for the shredded column "a".

*Operation*: Project as as variant.  In this case as I read the spec, it is valid for readers to return `{a: <some int value>}`.  Other valid options seem like (use the non-object `value` or fail).

## Inconsistency: The `typed_value` object is marked as non-present but the `value column` is present and contains object.

*Operation*: Project field as object only keeping fields "a" non-strict.  In this case readers would ignore the `value` column based on the spec and return null for the the inconsistency fields.

*Operation*: Project field only keep field "c" as variant.  In this case the reader should be able to ignore `typed_value` (it only contains an object "a" as a shredded column so it can be ignored) and return `{"c": <some value>}` but that is not what the specification states.

|----------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------|
| `["comedy", "drama"]`            | null        | non-null      | [null, null]          | [`comedy`, `drama`]            |
| `["horror", null]`               | null        | non-null      | [null, `00`]          | [`horror`, null]               |
| `["comedy", "drama", "romance"]` | null        | non-null      | [null, null, null]    | [`comedy`, `drama`, `romance`] |
| null                             | `00` (null) | null          |                       |                                |

#### Objects

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

If the value is an object, `typed_value` must be non-null.
If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.
Readers can assume that a value is not an object if `typed_value` is null and that `typed_value` field values are correct; that is, readers do not need to read the `value` column if `typed_value` fields satisfy the required fields.

> Each shredded field in the `typed_value` group is represented as a required group that contains optional `value` and `typed_value` fields.

Reviewer 4: Are there any cases where a field's name might not be a valid Parquet group name, making it impossible to shred? E.g. are there any restrictions on whitespace or non-printable characters in Parquet? Or any that should be discouraged for shredding, because readers are known to have trouble with them?

Reviewer 2: There are no specific restrictions in the spec that I can recall, there are certainly engines that don't support some characters but shredded columns should hopefully never reach engine schemas since only the top level variant would ideally be displayed.  For non-displayable characters general display and SQL projection functions would likely become cumbersome.

Some reference implementations might have issues with periods (`.`) but from an API perspective it isn't clear to me if there should be a separate API anyways to interrogate if certain variants are shredded.  This might be a design question to raise on the mailing list before beginning implementation.

### Shredded Value Types

Shredded values must use the following Parquet types:

| Variant Type                | Equivalent Parquet Type           |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| boolean                     | BOOLEAN                           |
| int8                        | INT(8, signed=true)               |
| int16                       | INT(16, signed=true)              |
| int32                       | INT32 / INT(32, signed=true)      |
| int64                       | INT64 / INT(64, signed=true)      |
| float                       | FLOAT                             |
| double                      | DOUBLE                            |
| decimal4                    | INT32 / DECIMAL(precision, scale) |
| decimal8                    | INT64 / DECIMAL(precision, scale) |
| decimal16                   | DECIMAL(precision, scale)         |
| date                        | DATE                              |
| time                        | TIME(false, MICROS)               |
| timestamp with time zone    | TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS|NANOS)     |

> | timestamp without time zone | TIMESTAMP(false, MICROS|NANOS)    |

Reviewer 7: nit: The code seems correct but the preview cuts off the words somehow.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b423f903-502f-4d0a-a1ec-701353bbcc16)

Author: I fixed this by adding separate columns for physical type and logical type annotation.

For now, it does not discuss which fields to shred, user-facing API changes, or any engine-specific considerations like how to use shredded columns.
The approach builds upon the [Variant Binary Encoding](VariantEncoding.md), and leverages the existing Parquet specification.

At a high level, we replace the `value` field of the Variant Parquet group with one or more fields called `object`, `array`, `typed_value`, and `variant_value`.

> These represent a fixed schema suitable for constructing the full Variant value for each row.

Author: I'm trying to simplify this to only require a special `typed_value` name.

With shredding, readers can get nearly equivalent performance as in a relational (scalar) data model.

For example, `SELECT variant_get(variant_event, '$.event_ts', 'timestamp') FROM tbl` only needs to access `event_ts`, and the file scan could avoid fetching the rest of the Variant value if this field was shredded into a separate column in the Parquet schema.
Similarly, for the query `SELECT * FROM tbl WHERE variant_get(variant_event, '$.event_type', 'string') = 'signup'`, the scan could first decode the shredded `event_type` column, and only fetch/decode the full Variant event value for rows that pass the filter.

## Variant Metadata

Variant metadata is stored in the top-level Variant group in a binary `metadata` column regardless of whether the Variant value is shredded.
All `variant_value` columns within the Variant must use the same `metadata`.

> All fields for a variant, whether shredded or not, must be present in the metadata.

Author: This may be controversial. I'm trying to say that you should not need to modify the metadata when reading. The reconstructed object should be able to use the stored metadata without adding fields.

Reviewer 11: I'm a little confused. When the field is not shredded, we will not have metadata for it, right? When it's getting shredded, then it will be like a column and we will generate metadata so it can be used for filtering/pruning?

Author: @sfc-gh-aixu, this is saying that when writing, the metadata for a shredded value and the metadata for a non-shredded value should be identical. Writers should not alter the metadata by removing shredded field names so that readers do not need to rewrite the metadata (and values) to add it back.

For example, consider an event that looks like this:
```
{
  "id": 102,
  "event_type": "signup",
  "event_timestamp": "2024-10-21T20:06:34.198724",
  "payload": {
    "a": 1,
    "b": 2
  }
}
```

And a shredding schema:
```
optional group event (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary value;
  optional group typed_value {
    required group event_type {
      optional binary value;
      optional binary typed_value (STRING);
    }
    required group event_timestamp {
      optional binary value;
      optional int64 typed_value (TIMESTAMP(true, MICROS));
    }
  }
}
```

The top-level `event_type` and `event_timestamp` fields are shredded. But this is saying that the Variant `metadata` _must_ include those field names. That ensure that the existing binary metadata can be returned to the engine without adding `event_type` and `event_timestamp` fields when merging those fields into the top-level Variant `value` when the entire Variant is projected.

For example, a `tags` Variant may be shredded as a list of strings using the following definition:
```
optional group tags (VARIANT) {
  required binary metadata;
  optional binary variant_value;
  optional group typed_value (LIST) { // must be optional to allow a null list
    repeated group list {
      required group element {
        optional binary variant_value;
        optional binary typed_value (STRING);
      }
    }
  }
}
```

All elements of an array must be non-null, since `array` elements cannote be missing.
Either `typed_value` or `variant_value` (but not both) must be non-null.

#### Objects (Option 1)

Fields of an object can be shredded using a Parquet group for `typed_value` that contains shredded fields.

If the value is not an object, `typed_value` must be null.

<!-- TODO: Why not keep non-shredded fields in the object itself? -->
If the value is a partially shredded object, the `variant_value` must not contain shredded fields. If such fields are present, the object is invalid and readers must either fail or use the values from the `variant_value`.

> Each shredded field is represented as a required group that contains a `variant_value` and a `typed_value` field.

Reviewer 3: Why each shredded field  should be a required group is not clear to me. If fields were allowed to be optional, that would be another way of indicating non-existence of fields.

Author: The primary purpose is to reduce the number of cases that implementers have to deal with. If all of the cases can be expressed with 2 optional fields rather than 2 optional fields inside an optional group, then the group should be required to simplify as much as possible.

In addition, every level in Parquet that is optional introduces another repetition/definition level. That adds up quickly with nested structures and ends up taking unnecessary space.

For now, it does not discuss which fields to shred, user-facing API changes, or any engine-specific considerations like how to use shredded columns.
The approach builds upon the [Variant Binary Encoding](VariantEncoding.md), and leverages the existing Parquet specification.

> Shredding allows a query engine to reap the full benefits of Parquet's columnar representation, such as more compact data encoding, min/max statistics for data skipping, and I/O and CPU savings from pruning unnecessary fields not accessed by a query (including the non-shredded Variant binary data).

Reviewer: Another place I'd like to just remove some of the text here. My main goal here is just to reduce the amount of text in the spec

Author: I reduced this, but I don't think it's a problem to have a bit of context that answers the question "What is shredding and why do I care?"
